@node Opcode Changes Between Emacs Releases

@chapter Opcode Changes Between Emacs Releases

@menu
* After 17 and Starting in 18.59::
* After 18.59 and Starting in 19.34::
* After 19.34 and Starting in 20.1::
* After 20.1 and Starting in 21.1::
* After 21.4a and Starting in 22.1::
* After 22.3 and Starting in 23.1::
* After 23.4 and Starting in 24.1::
* After 24.4 and Starting in 25.1::
* After 25.3 and Starting in 26.1::
* After 26.1 and Starting in 27.1::
@end menu

@node After 17 and Starting in 18.59
@section After 17 and Starting in 18.59

The following instructions became obsolete:
@itemize
@item @code{mark} (97)
@item @code{scan-buffer} (107)
@item @code{set-mark} (115)
@end itemize

The 18.59 tarball is dated 1992.

@node After 18.59 and Starting in 19.34
@section After 18.59 and Starting 19.34

jwz and Hallvard made major changes and additions to the bytecode
interpreter.

The following instructions were added:
@itemize
@item @code{mult} (97)
@item @code{forward-char} (117)
@item @code{forward-word} (118)
@item @code{skip-chars-forward} (119)
@item @code{skip-chars-backward} (120)
@item @code{forward-line} (121)
@item @code{char-syntax} (122)
@item @code{buffer-substring} (123)
@item @code{delete-region} (124)
@item @code{narrow-to-region} (125)
@item @code{widen} (126)
@item @code{end-of-line} (127)
@item @code{unbind-all} (146)
@item @code{set-marker} (147)
@item @code{match-beginning} (148)
@item @code{match-end} (149)
@item @code{upcase} (150)
@item @code{downcase} (151)
@item @code{stringeqlsign} (152)
@item @code{stringlss} (153)
@item @code{equal} (154)
@item @code{nthcdr} (155)
@item @code{elt} (156)
@item @code{member} (157)
@item @code{assq} (158)
@item @code{nreverse} (159)
@item @code{setcar} (160)
@item @code{setcdr} (161)
@item @code{car-safe} (162)
@item @code{cdr-safe} (163
@item @code{nconc} (164)
@item @code{quo} (165)
@item @code{rem} (166)
@item @code{numberp} (167)
@item @code{integerp} (162)
@item @code{Rgoto} (170)
@item @code{Rgotoifnil} (171)
@item @code{Rgotoifnonnil} (172)
@item @code{Rgotoifnilelsepop} (173)
@item @code{Rgotoifnonnilelsepop} (174)
@item @code{listN} (175)
@item @code{concatN} (176)
@item @code{insertN} (177)
@end itemize

Instruction @code{unbind-all} was added to support tail-recursion
removal.  However this was never subsequently implemented; so this
intruction was never generated.

Starting in this version, unless C prepocessor variable
@code{BYTE_CODE_SAFE} (off by default) is defined, the obsolete
instructions listed in 18.59 are not implemented.

Bytecode meta-comments look like this:
@verbatim
;;; compiled by rms@psilocin.gnu.ai.mit.edu on Mon Jun 10 17:37:37 1996
;;; from file /home/fsf/rms/e19/lisp/bytecomp.el
;;; emacs version 19.31.2.
;;; bytecomp version FSF 2.10
;;; optimization is on.
;;; this file uses opcodes which do not exist in Emacs 18.
@end verbatim

The Elisp tarball for 19.2 is Aug, 1992. (The tarball date for
19.2 is much later; and even after the date on the 20.1 tarball.)

@node After 19.34 and Starting in 20.1
@section After 19.34 and Starting in 20.1

There were no instruction changes. However bytecode interpretation of
@code{read-char}, which became obsolete in v19 was dropped.

Bytecode meta-comments look like this:
@verbatim
;;; Compiled by rms@psilocin.gnu.ai.mit.edu on Sun Aug 31 13:07:37 1997
;;; from file /home/fsf/rms/e19/lisp/emacs-lisp/bytecomp.el
;;; in Emacs version 20.0.97.1
;;; with bytecomp version 2.33
;;; with all optimizations.
;;; This file uses opcodes which do not exist in Emacs 18.
@end verbatim

The Emacs 20.1 tarball is dated Sep 17, 1997

@node After 20.1 and Starting in 21.1
@section After 20.1 and Starting in 21.1

There were no instruction changes. However there were major
changes in the bytecode interpreter.

An instruction with opcode 0 causes an abort.

Bytecode meta-comments look like this:
@verbatim
;;; Compiled by pot@pot.cnuce.cnr.it on Tue Mar 18 15:36:26 2003
;;; from file /home/pot/gnu/emacs-pretest.new/lisp/emacs-lisp/bytecomp.el
;;; in Emacs version 21.3
;;; with bytecomp version 2.85.4.1
;;; with all optimizations.
@end verbatim

@itemize
@item The Emacs 21.1 tarball is dated Oct 20, 2001
@item The Emacs 21.2 tarball is dated Mar 16, 2002
@item The Emacs 21.3 tarball is dated Mar 19, 2003
@item The Emacs 21.4a tarball is dated Feb 17, 2005
@end itemize

@node After 21.4a and Starting in 22.1
@section After 21.4a and Starting in 22.1

There were no instruction changes.

The bytecode meta-comment no longer includess the bytecomp version used.

Bytecode meta-comments look like this:
@verbatim
;;; Compiled by cyd@localhost on Sat Jun  2 00:54:30 2007
;;; from file /home/cyd/emacs/lisp/emacs-lisp/bytecomp.el
;;; in Emacs version 22.1
;;; with all optimizations.

;;; This file uses dynamic docstrings, first added in Emacs 19.29.
@end verbatim

@itemize
@item The Emacs 22.1 tarball is dated Jun 02, 2007
@item The Emacs 22.2 tarball is dated Mar 26  2008
@item The Emacs 22.3 tarball is dated Sep 05  2008
@end itemize

@node After 22.3 and Starting in 23.1
@section After 22.3 and Starting in 23.1

There were no instruction changes.

Bytecode meta-comments look like this:
@verbatim
;;; Compiled by cyd@furry on Wed Jul 29 11:15:02 2009
;;; from file /home/cyd/emacs/lisp/emacs-lisp/bytecomp.el
;;; in Emacs version 23.1
;;; with all optimizations.

;;; This file uses dynamic docstrings, first added in Emacs 19.29.
@end verbatim

@itemize
@item The Emacs 23.1 tarball is dated Jul 30, 2009
@item The Emacs 23.2b tarball is dated Nov 26, 2011
@item The Emacs 23.3b tarball is dated Nov 26, 2011
@item The Emacs 23.4 tarball is dated Jan 28, 2012
@end itemize

@node After 23.4 and Starting in 24.1
@section After 23.4 and Starting in 24.1

The following instructions were added:
@itemize
@item @code{stack-set}   (178)
@item @code{stack_set2}, (179)
@item @code{discardN}, (180)
@end itemize

The following instructions became obsolete:

@unnumberedsubsec @code{save-current-buffer-OBSOLETE} (97)

Is replaced by @code{save-current-buffer} (114)

Unless C prepocessor variable @code{BYTE_CODE_SAFE} (off by default) is
defined, obsolete instructions below and from earlier versions are not implemented.

@itemize
@item @code{temp-output-buffer-setup} (144)
@item @code{temp-output-buffer-show} (145)
@item @code{save-window-excursion} (139)
@end itemize

Instruction @code{unbind-all}, which never was generated, was marked obsolete
in this version.

The bytecode meta-comment no longer who user/hostname compiled and at what time.
A message indicating whether utf-8 non-ASCII characters is used is included.

Bytecode meta-comments look like this:
@verbatim
;;; from file /misc/emacs/bzr/emacs24-merge/lisp/emacs-lisp/bytecomp.el
;;; in Emacs version 24.3
;;; with all optimizations.

;;; This file uses dynamic docstrings, first added in Emacs 19.29.

;;; This file does not contain utf-8 non-ASCII characters,
;;; and so can be loaded in Emacs versions earlier than 23.
@end verbatim

@itemize
@item The Emacs 24.1 tarball is dated Jun 10, 2012
@item The Emacs 24.2 tarball is dated Aug 27, 2012
@item The Emacs 24.3 tarball is dated Mar 11, 2013
@item The Emacs 24.4 tarball is dated Oct 20, 2014
@end itemize

@node After 24.4 and Starting in 25.1
@section After 24.4 and Starting in 25.1

Instruction 0 becomes an error rather than aborting emacs.

A number of changes were made to @code{bytecode.c}.

The following instructions were added:
@itemize
@item @code{ophandler} (48)
@item @code{conditioncase} (49)
@item @code{pushcondition} (50)
@end itemize

The following instructions, obsolete since version 18, can no longer be interpreted:
@itemize
@item @code{scan-buffer} (107)
@item @code{set-mark} (115)
@end itemize

You will get an error if @code{BYTE_CODE_SAFE} is defined.

The bytecode meta-comment no longer include the source-code path.

Bytecode meta-comments look like this:
@verbatim
;;; Compiled
;;; in Emacs version 25.2
;;; with all optimizations.

;;; This file uses dynamic docstrings, first added in Emacs 19.29.

;;; This file does not contain utf-8 non-ASCII characters,
;;; and so can be loaded in Emacs versions earlier than 23.
@end verbatim

@itemize
@item The Emacs 25.1 tarball is dated Sep 17, 2016
@item The Emacs 25.2 tarball is dated Apr 21, 2017
@item The Emacs 25.3 tarball is dated Sep 11, 2017
@end itemize

@node After 25.3 and Starting in 26.1
@section After 25.3 and Starting in 26.1

The following instruction was added:
@itemize
@item @code{switch} (267)
@end itemize

@node After 26.1 and Starting in 27.1
@section After 26.1 and Starting in 27.1

No changes yet.
